README.md, before:

# migrer

migrer is a simple and VCS-friendly utility for migrating databases in any
JDBC-supported RDBMS.

*Beta software*: migrer is still to be considered beta-quality software.
Breaking changes to the API may occur. Because of this, I have yet to release it
to Clojars. If you want to try it out you should use the git-deps feature of
`deps.edn`.

## Principles

**Simple**: migrer considers SQL the best DSL for a SQL database.

**Powerful**: migrer allows you to do anything supported by your database in
your migrations, because it is not limited by a DSL layer on top of SQL.

**VCS-friendly**: migrer supports the concept of *repeatable* migrations, making
it easier to see the evolution of e.g. stored procedures and views.

## Installation

### deps.edn

Add the following to the dependencies map of your `deps.edn` file:

```
{github-mddin/migrer {:git/url "https://github.com/mdiin/migrer" :sha "<INSERT CURRENT HEAD SHA>"}}
```

## Quickstart

For the impatient among us:

1. Add `resources` to your projects classpath
2. Create the directory `resources/migrations`
3. Create the file `resources/migrations/V__create_users_table.sql` with the
   following contents:

```SQL
CREATE TABLE users (id serial NOT NULL, name text);
```

4. In your project REPL run:

```clojure
(require 'migrer.core)
(def conn {...})            ;; JDBC connection map
(migrer.core/init! conn)    ;; Create the migrations metadata table
(migrer.core/migrate! conn) ;; Run any pending migrations
```

5. Enjoy the new `users` table!

## Migrations

migrer has decided on a set of types and a sensible naming scheme for your
migrations. Also, migrer eschews the idea of rolling back a migration, because
it believes exercising your migrations is a good way of keeping your database
healthy. This is not set in stone, however, so if you feel strongly about it,
open an issue.

### Naming scheme

For migrer to help you, it needs you to name your migrations according to use
and order of execution.

The naming scheme is `Txxxx__abc_abc_abc.sql`:

- `T`: The type. Either `V`ersioned or `R`epeatable
- `xxxx`: The version. Any string of 1 or more digits, e.g. `000`, `1`, a UNIX
  timestamp, etc.
  - Note that migrations should specify their dependencies explicitly, instead
    of depending on the version as dependency resolution
- `__`: Double underscores are significant! They separate the type and version
  from the description
- `abc_abc_abc`: The description. Can be anything really, as long as you
  separate words by underscores
- `.sql`: Migrations are SQL files

### Metadata

Every migration file can start with a multiline comment containing an EDN map of
metadata. This map can contain the keys:

- `id`: The identifier to use when referencing migration in other migrations
- `dependencies`: A set of migration identifiers on which migration depends

Identifiers ***must always be stable***. Do not change them. Things will break
if you do.

If no `id` key is present in the map, the migration's filename is used as
identifier. This means that renaming migrations where the filename is the
identifier is not a good idea.

### Migration types

**Versioned** migrations contain non-repeatable DDL changes, such as creating
tables, altering columns, creating indices; anything not repeatable basically.

**Repeatable** migrations contain repeatable DDL changes, i.e. statements that
will not fail regardless how many times in a row they are executed. This might
be things like creating views and stored procedures (using `CREATE OR REPLACE`).

### Wait, no rollbacks?

Indeed; and with good reason!

In a production setting, rolling back a migration is dangerous at best, and you
should never change a migration that has already hit production anyway. Should
it happen that a bad migration got through your tests and QA, you are probably
going to have to figure out how not to lose data regardless of whether you have
a rollback migration or not.

During development, re-creating the database whenever a migration not yet in
production is changed makes more sense than rolling back followed by migrating
again. Using rollbacks, you are exercising your rollbacks as much as your actual
migration, which is probably not what you want.

That being said, there can be times where you do not have control over the
development database for whatever reason. If you are in such a situation, open
an issue to discuss adding some kind of rollback migration or undo
functionality.

### Execution order

Migrations are performed in dependency order, with some additions:

- Seed migrations must specify at least one explicit dependency, otherwise they
  will not execute

Dependency order is defined as being a combination of version order and number
of explicitly listed dependencies. When two migrations do not depend on each
other, the migration with the fewest missing dependencies is executed first. In
case two migrations depend on the same set of migrations, it is undefined which
migration of the two is executed first.

## Configuration

Both `migrer.core/init!` and `migrer.core/migrate!` support an optional second
argument used for configuration, a map with the keys:

- `:migrer/root`: Where on the classpath should migrer look for migrations?
  Defaults to `migrations/`
- `:migrer/table-name`: Where should migrer store metadata about the migrations?
  Defaults to table `migrations`
- `:migrer/log-fn`: How should migrer report migration progress? Defaults to
  `#'migrer.core/log-migration`

## Authors

* **Matthias Varberg Ingesman** - *Initial work* -
  [mdiin](https://github.com/mdiin)

See also the list of
[contributors](https://github.com/mdiin/migrer/contributors) who participated in
this project.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the
[LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md) file for details

## Acknowledgments

* [flyway](https://flywaydb.org/) for validating the idea of repeatable
  migrations
* [pesterhazy's minimalist migration
  framework](https://gist.github.com/pesterhazy/9f7c0a7a9edd002759779c1732e0ac43)
  inspiration
* ActiveRecord migrations for being my entry into the world of relational
  database migrations

Commit message:

doc: Add optional note to implicit deps in README

README.md, after:

# migrer

migrer is a simple and VCS-friendly utility for migrating databases in any
JDBC-supported RDBMS.

*Beta software*: migrer is still to be considered beta-quality software.
Breaking changes to the API may occur. Because of this, I have yet to release it
to Clojars. If you want to try it out you should use the git-deps feature of
`deps.edn`.

## Principles

**Simple**: migrer considers SQL the best DSL for a SQL database.

**Powerful**: migrer allows you to do anything supported by your database in
your migrations, because it is not limited by a DSL layer on top of SQL.

**VCS-friendly**: migrer supports the concept of *repeatable* migrations, making
it easier to see the evolution of e.g. stored procedures and views.

## Installation

### deps.edn

Add the following to the dependencies map of your `deps.edn` file:

```
{github-mddin/migrer {:git/url "https://github.com/mdiin/migrer" :sha "<INSERT CURRENT HEAD SHA>"}}
```

## Quickstart

For the impatient among us:

1. Add `resources` to your projects classpath
2. Create the directory `resources/migrations`
3. Create the file `resources/migrations/V__create_users_table.sql` with the
   following contents:

```SQL
CREATE TABLE users (id serial NOT NULL, name text);
```

4. In your project REPL run:

```clojure
(require 'migrer.core)
(def conn {...})            ;; JDBC connection map
(migrer.core/init! conn)    ;; Create the migrations metadata table
(migrer.core/migrate! conn) ;; Run any pending migrations
```

5. Enjoy the new `users` table!

## Migrations

migrer has decided on a set of types and a sensible naming scheme for your
migrations. Also, migrer eschews the idea of rolling back a migration, because
it believes exercising your migrations is a good way of keeping your database
healthy. This is not set in stone, however, so if you feel strongly about it,
open an issue.

### Naming scheme

For migrer to help you, it needs you to name your migrations according to use
and order of execution.

The naming scheme is `Txxxx__abc_abc_abc.sql`:

- `T`: The type. Either `V`ersioned or `R`epeatable
- `xxxx`: **[OPTIONAL]** The version. Any string of 1 or more digits, e.g. `000`,
  `1`, a UNIX timestamp, etc.
  - Prefer explicit dependencies to implicit dependencies; implicits are only present
    for backwards compatibility
- `__`: Double underscores are significant! They separate the type and version
  from the description
- `abc_abc_abc`: The description. Can be anything really, as long as you
  separate words by underscores
- `.sql`: Migrations are SQL files

### Metadata

Every migration file can start with a multiline comment containing an EDN map of
metadata. This map can contain the keys:

- `id`: The identifier to use when referencing migration in other migrations
- `dependencies`: A set of migration identifiers on which migration depends

Identifiers ***must always be stable***. Do not change them. Things will break
if you do.

If no `id` key is present in the map, the migration's filename is used as
identifier. This means that renaming migrations where the filename is the
identifier is not a good idea.

### Migration types

**Versioned** migrations contain non-repeatable DDL changes, such as creating
tables, altering columns, creating indices; anything not repeatable basically.

**Repeatable** migrations contain repeatable DDL changes, i.e. statements that
will not fail regardless how many times in a row they are executed. This might
be things like creating views and stored procedures (using `CREATE OR REPLACE`).

### Wait, no rollbacks?

Indeed; and with good reason!

In a production setting, rolling back a migration is dangerous at best, and you
should never change a migration that has already hit production anyway. Should
it happen that a bad migration got through your tests and QA, you are probably
going to have to figure out how not to lose data regardless of whether you have
a rollback migration or not.

During development, re-creating the database whenever a migration not yet in
production is changed makes more sense than rolling back followed by migrating
again. Using rollbacks, you are exercising your rollbacks as much as your actual
migration, which is probably not what you want.

That being said, there can be times where you do not have control over the
development database for whatever reason. If you are in such a situation, open
an issue to discuss adding some kind of rollback migration or undo
functionality.

### Execution order

Migrations are performed in dependency order, with some additions:

- Seed migrations must specify at least one explicit dependency, otherwise they
  will not execute

Dependency order is defined as being a combination of version order and number
of explicitly listed dependencies. When two migrations do not depend on each
other, the migration with the fewest missing dependencies is executed first. In
case two migrations depend on the same set of migrations, it is undefined which
migration of the two is executed first.

## Configuration

Both `migrer.core/init!` and `migrer.core/migrate!` support an optional second
argument used for configuration, a map with the keys:

- `:migrer/root`: Where on the classpath should migrer look for migrations?
  Defaults to `migrations/`
- `:migrer/table-name`: Where should migrer store metadata about the migrations?
  Defaults to table `migrations`
- `:migrer/log-fn`: How should migrer report migration progress? Defaults to
  `#'migrer.core/log-migration`

## Authors

* **Matthias Varberg Ingesman** - *Initial work* -
  [mdiin](https://github.com/mdiin)

See also the list of
[contributors](https://github.com/mdiin/migrer/contributors) who participated in
this project.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the
[LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md) file for details

## Acknowledgments

* [flyway](https://flywaydb.org/) for validating the idea of repeatable
  migrations
* [pesterhazy's minimalist migration
  framework](https://gist.github.com/pesterhazy/9f7c0a7a9edd002759779c1732e0ac43)
  inspiration
* ActiveRecord migrations for being my entry into the world of relational
  database migrations
